feat(blog): add blog post for 1.10 (#5175)
vercel/turbo: docs/pages/blog/turbo-1-10-0.mdx

for more control. Custom generators leverage [Plop](https://plopjs.com/) configurations, a common template definition strategy used in the JavaScript ecosystem.

[Custom generators](/repo/docs/core-concepts/monorepos/code-generation#custom-generators) can also be used to scaffold more granular sets of code than workspaces. You can significantly speed up tasks like:

- [Adding new components to your UI library](https://github.com/vercel/turbo/blob/main/examples/basic/packages/ui/turbo/generators/config.ts)
- Creating new unit tests
- Generating a new MDX blog post (In fact, this very post was created with a [Turborepo generator](https://github.com/vercel/turbo/blob/main/docs/turbo/generators/config.ts)!)

Get started with your first generator by running:

```
turbo gen
```

For more, check out the [documentation](/repo/docs/core-concepts/monorepos/code-generation).

## Improved Environment Variable Inputs

### Support for `.env` files

> Developers and frameworks commonly use `.env` files to load environment variables into their development environments. This can cause problems when running with turbo, as these variables can be [invisible](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#invisible-environment-variables), and are not easily
> included in the hash for your task. This problem could cause an unintended cache hit while working locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`.env` files](https://www.dotenv.org/docs/) are commonly used to load environment variables. This can cause problems when running with turbo, because these variables can be [invisible](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#invisible-environment-variables), and are not easily
included in the hash for your task. This problem could cause unintended cache hits while working locally.
```

Turbo now makes this much easier with automatic support for `.env` files.

> To ensure that `turbo` includes these variables in your hash, use the `dotEnv` key. For example, here is a configuration for a Next.js application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that `turbo` includes the values of these variables in your hash, use the `dotEnv` key. For example, here is a configuration for a Next.js application:
```

Author: I want to try and stay as far away as we can from language that anyone might interpret as "we use this to determine which env vars to depend on" when in fact we just include the file in the hash. If the values are there, we include them. But it's not something we do automatically.

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://turbo.build/schema.json",
  "globalDotEnv": [".env"],
  "pipeline": {
    "build": {
      "dotEnv": [".env.production.local", ".env.local", ".env.production", ".env"]
    },
    "dev": {
      "dotEnv": [".env.development.local", ".env.local", ".env.development", ".env"]
    },
    "test": {
      "dotEnv": [".env.test.local", ".env.test", ".env"]
    }
  }
}
```

<Callout>

>   This feature does **not** handle system environment variables. If you are not using `.env` files outside of development, make sure your environment variables are still enumerated in either [env](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#pipelinetaskenv), or [globalEnv](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#globalenv) to ensure they are included in your hash.

Reviewer: what are "system environment variables"?

Author: Yea good call - we definitely should. I'll add them to the new env var docs

</Callout>

For more, check out the [documentation](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#env-files).

### Environment Variable Wildcards

Large applications can end up with many environment variables in their `turbo.json`. This can make maintaining your `turbo.json` extremely difficult to manage and maintain.

With wildcards, you can now specify patterns of variables to include in your hash.

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://turbo.build/schema.json",
  "pipeline": {
    "build": {
      "env": ["ACME_*"]
    }
  }
}
```

For more, check out the [documentation](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#wildcards).

### Environment modes

Turborepo environment modes are now out of [experimental mode](/repo/docs/faq#what-does-experimental-mean) and are available for general use.

> By default, and when turbo is invoked with --env-mode=loose , all environment variables from the machine are made available to every single turbo task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, and when `turbo run` is invoked with `--env-mode=loose`, all environment variables from the machine are made available to every single turbo task.
```

This ensures the greatest compatibility while accepting some risk that a task will implicitly have access to a environment variable that is not specified in your `turbo.json`.

> In the new strict mode, when turbo is invoked with --env-mode=strict , only [important system environment variables](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#system-environment-variables) and environment variables enumerated inside of turbo.json will be made available to a task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the new strict mode, when turbo is invoked with --env-mode=strict, only [important system environment variables](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#system-environment-variables) and environment variables enumerated inside of turbo.json will be made available to a task.
```

For more, check out the [documentation](/repo/docs/core-concepts/caching/environment-variable-inputs#loose--strict-environment-modes).

## Community

Since releasing [Turborepo v1.9](/blog/turbo-1-9-0) we've seen incredible adoption and community growth:

- [21.5k+ GitHub Stars](https://github.com/vercel/turbo)
- [1.2M+ weekly NPM downloads](https://www.npmjs.com/package/turbo)
- 85 years of compute time saved through [Remote Caching on Vercel](https://vercel.com/docs/concepts/monorepos/remote-caching)

Turborepo is the result of the combined work of all of its contributors, including our core team:

> - [Jared](https://github.com/jaredpalmer), [Greg](https://github.com/gsoltis), [Nathan](https://github.com/nathanhammond), [Thomas](https://github.com/tknickman), [Mehul](https://github.com/mehulkar), [Chris](https://github.com/chris-olszewski), [Nicholas](https://github.com/NicholasLYang), and [Alexander](https://github.com/arlyon)

Reviewer: to match authors (except chris who doesn't have twitter)

```suggestion
- [Jared](https://twitter.com/jaredpalmer), [Greg](https://twitter.com/gsoltis), [Nathan](https://twitter.com/nathanhammond), [Thomas](https://twitter.com/tknickman), [Mehul](https://twitter.com/mehulkar), [Chris](https://github.com/chris-olszewski), [Nicholas](https://twitter.com/nicholaslyang), and [Alexander](https://twitter.com/_arlyon)
```
(not a big deal if we're matching nextjs, but i personally prefer twitter ref over gh :))

Author: I think we should keep github to match Next, and to ensure everyone has a link. Gives us all a good place to add our own info on our github profiles too.
